+++ 
title = "Whose Goals Are You Chasing?"
date = 2025-10-04
draft = true
+++ 

# Who's Goals Are You Chasing?

You join a tech company, you see driven people working hard to make what they think is important.
You want to fit in, to be useful, to contribute. Surrounded by this energy, your own goals are
automatically altered to match that energy.

You read a textbook on object-oriented programming, the author tries to tell you which kinds of
problems OOP solves and that those goals are very important. The goals that OOP people want to solve
quickly become the goals that you want to solve as well.

Every day, you see stories on Hacker News about how to build systems that work at scale. These
stories about Kubernetes keep popping up, so you figure that this must be pretty important.
Naturally, in your next project, having a sophisticated infra setup becomes an early requirement.

Nerdy CEOs like Mark Zuckerberg, Patrick Collison, Jensen Huang gather a lot of attention because of
what they've achieved. You find them relatable and you find their stories inspiring, so you
gradually being to compare your own goals with theirs. When your goals differ from theirs, you
figure that they must know something you don't, so you alter your goals to match theirs. Slowly, you
begin to notice that you've started to place expectations on yourself about matching their
achievements: starting a company, having millions of users, changing the world. "Facebook started
out as a dorm room project," you think, "so anything is possible. That's how high the bar is. That's
the kind of effort I should match."

In each and every one of these instances, you'll notice that the direction of your career is being
influenced by what's around you: though leaders, success stories, best practices, the next big
thing, industry trends. You don't really know what's best for you and maybe those dreams you had as
an impressionable kid came from a place naivety. Perhaps they were too foolish work in the real
world. 

So, you look around you and see what's working, then you try to latch on to that. You ride that
wave, there's no shame in it. Not everyone is a leader and, as is it has become evident by your lack
of direction, you aren't one either. (The thought that you could become one later down the line --
that is, once you've reached a certain level of competence -- gives you enough comfort for now to
not shatter your ego.)

With your new sense of purpose and meaning in life, trying to become the best at this thing you've
decided to dedicate so much of your life to, you complete that project you had been working on for
months. It's out, customers are happy, every task is ticked out, people go on holiday. Mission
completed successfully, reap the rewards and take some rest before we go again. Except that you
don't like what you've reaped. You don't want to spoil the party, so this feeling is left unheard.
"Perhaps it'll click on the next one," you think. "Or, maybe it won't; but, this isn't about me.
It's not about what I like, it's about doing what's efficient and what makes sense. I'll play my
part, I'll be the cog. Someone has to do it: without people like me, this great machinery won't be
able to run."

You've gotten too accustomed to thinking about what you should do, not what you want to do. You've
tried so hard to not think about the self; to not project your personality onto your work; to be
this rational machine that only responds to reason, not to superficial preferences. This is real
engineering you're doing here, not some art project. We must be consistent, we must follow that
which has been proven to work, don't reinvent the wheel and don't deviate from protocol if you don't
have a good reason to (and if you do, make sure that you're ready to explain it clearly). 

Being rational has always been part of your personality, you've always wanted to be pragmatic, to
get things done, so this shouldn't be a problem. This all makes sense, this is how the world works,
this is how an organization ensures that it doesn't descent into a chaotic mess. Your longing for
agency isn't the organization's priority. And why would it be? 

This version of you is supposedly grounded in reality, unlike that kid with those idealistic dreams.
Yet, it turns out that he isn't so smart after all. You haven't paid attention to your wants and
needs, to what was important to you and, for some reason, now you're surprised that things don't
feel right. But how can it be any other way? You made a choice somewhere along the line that trading
that sense of individuality for something important is a worthy sacrifice. Only to realize that it
wasn't really all that important.

At this point, you typically have two options. The first one is to sympathize with those work-life
balance gurus and settle for an unextraordinary career. Yes, you'll never feel like those guys at
Bell Labs did when they wrote Unix because you'll never build anything remarkable. And it might feel
grim to admit that now you're distinguishing your time between life and non-life (i.e., work,
apparently). But, this is a decent way to live -- given that you've managed to find meaning
somewhere else in life. Nothing to be ashamed of here; most people get around living like this and
they seem to be doing just fine. 

Or, you take the second option: you find something else to do. Life is this precious thing, so you
might as well make something out of it. Exercise your agency, follow your gut, take a leap of faith,
build your own ideas, work harder than anyone else, and see where that takes you.
