+++ 
title = "Writing Code vs Writing Prose"
date = 2025-09-29
draft = true
+++ 

# Writing Code vs. Writing Prose

Programming languages were developed because natural language isn't adequate to communicate
instructions to computers. Programming languages consist of tools which are very composable. You can
take a line of code and start putting things into it or removing things from it to drastically
change its meaning. Doing that with natural language is also possible, but not the extent that it is
with a programming language. With code, operations can be stacked, complex behavior (which would take
dozens of sentences to explain properly in natural language) can be represented with a couple of
lines of code, and special notation/syntax is developed to aid readability.

With code, you can take a poorly-written codebase and improve it little by little, incrementally,
until you're left with something which is pretty decent. You can't really do the same with prose. You
can make slight adjustments, but you can't convert a terrible book into a great one by redacting it,
little by little. Sometimes the whole point of good prose is to have good flow and that flow is often
ruined by heavy editing.

Great writers usually come up with something good within the first few attempts, or they don't. If
you give a poor writer three years to work on the same book, they probably won't come up with a very
good book. For writing, it seems more of a case of you either have it or you don't. It doesn't mean
that you won't be able to get good one day, but you just can't produce something that's really good
without being skilled. 

A poor programmer can write a decent program given that they've thought long and hard about the
problem at hand; that is, they've done lots of testing, handled all edge cases, followed a strict
programming style, followed all the recommendations generated by the static analyzers, and used a
debugger to make sure that every line does what it needs to do. When writing code, you can use the
computer to get feedback about your work as you're writing and compiling your code. Writers don't
really get the same amount of feedback from reading their work.

As a programmer, you can write a decent program even if you're not very skilled, provided that we've
gone through enough iterations and now understand all the things that you didn't even think about
before your started. For a functional requirement (like adding a new feature, e.g.), you have a
clear proxy of success: the feature either works or it doesn't. For a non-functional requirement,
you have benchmarks which you can run to test resource usage, FPS, latency, or whatever you need to
test.

As a writer, you take pride in your style and ability to challenge convention. And while a
programmer can develop taste and personal style too, that isn't exactly a must have if you want to
write good code.

Just like there are different kinds of writing, there are also different kinds of programming. But,
what often ends up happening is that organizations tend to want to unify these differences so they
don't rely on certain programmers if they ever decide to leave. During review, code is often
analyzed and systemically checked against a set of conventions: a colleague can tell you exactly
what you need to do improve your code with regards to what's considered good code within that
organization. On the other hand, an editor can give you pointers, but they won't be able to write
for you and, with the exception of straightforward mistakes, they won't be able to provide
definitive suggestion.

There are similarities, of course. One thing that code- and prose-writing have in common is that
both activities can be used as a means of exploration, not just as means to an end. Writers often
write to organize their ideas and perhaps generate new ideas in the process of writing, because the
act of putting thoughts into words acts a useful test for assessing one's understating of the topic
at hand. Programmers often write throwaway code to test out certain assumptions before investing
weeks of work with a specific approach. 

You might also argue that it's also not uncommon for programmers to write some code and then to
discard it all by starting from scratch like writers do; but, in my experience, that doesn't
happen all the time and when it does happen, you usually use the previous version for reference.

---

I've been thinking about these differences lately because I've noticed that I have a tendency to
treat my prose like code. When I write a blog article, I always think that I can improve it on the
next sitting. I think of drafts as unfinished projects that can always be tweaked. But, what I've
found is that if I come up with something that just isn't good enough, no amount of tweaking will do
the job. At that point, starting from scratch and rethinking the entire thing is right thing to do. 
