+++ 
title = "Writing Code vs Writing Prose"
date = 2025-09-29
draft = true
+++ 

# Writing Code vs. Writing Prose

Programming languages were developed because natural language isn't adequate to communicate
instructions to computers. Unlike natural langauge, programming languages consist of tools which are
very composable. You can take a line of code and start putting things into it or removing things
from it to drastically change its meaning. Doing that with natural language is also possible, but
not the extent that it is with a programming language. With code, operations can be stacked, complex
behavior (which would take dozens of sentences to explain properly in natural language) can be
represented with a couple of lines of code, and special notation/syntax is developed to aid
readability.

With code, you can take a poorly-written codebase and improve it little by little, incrementally,
until you're left with something which is pretty decent. You can't really do the same with prose.
You can make slight adjustments, but you can't convert a terrible book into a great one by redacting
it repeatedly. Sometimes the whole point of good prose is to have good flow and that flow is often
ruined by heavy editing.

With software, you have proxies you can use for measuring how well you're doing. For a functional
requirement (like adding a new feature, e.g.), you usually have a clear indicator of success: the
feature either works or it doesn't. For a non-functional requirement, you have benchmarks which you
can run to test resource usage, latency, frames per second, or some other metrics that you might
find relevant. There's no such for proxy for writing prose. There's no definitive way of knowing
whether what you've written will resonate with anyone out there.

Writing and programming aren't always working on the goals. With writing, you are trying to
communicate to another human. With code, you're trying to communicate with a language that's been
designed for controlling a computer. Since your code will be read by other humans, you'll also want
to take that into account, but that's not always the goal that you want to optimize for. 

As a writer, you take pride in your style and ability to challenge convention. And while a
programmer can develop taste and personal style too, that isn't exactly a must have if you want to
write good code.

Just like there are different kinds of writing, there are also different kinds of programming. But,
what often ends up happening is that organizations tend to want to unify these differences so they
don't rely on certain programmers if they ever decide to leave. During review, code is often
analyzed and systemically checked against a set of conventions: a colleague can tell you exactly
what you need to do improve your code with regards to what's considered good code within that
organization. On the other hand, an editor can give you pointers, but they won't be able to write
for you and, with the exception of straightforward mistakes, they won't be able to provide
definitive suggestions.

There are similarities, of course. One thing that code- and prose-writing have in common is that
both activities can be used as a means of exploration, not just as means to an end. Writers often
write to organize their ideas and perhaps generate new ideas in the process of writing, because the
act of putting thoughts into words acts a useful test for assessing one's understating of the topic
at hand. Programmers often write throwaway code to test out certain assumptions before investing
weeks of work with a specific approach. 

You might also argue that it's also not uncommon for programmers to write some code and then to
discard it all by starting from scratch like writers do; but, in my experience, that doesn't
happen all the time and when it does happen, you usually use the previous version for reference.

---

I've been thinking about these differences lately because I've noticed that I have a tendency to
treat my prose like code. When I write a blog article, I always think that I can improve it on the
next sitting. I think of drafts as unfinished projects that can always be tweaked. But, what I've
found is that if I come up with something that just isn't good enough, no amount of tweaking will do
the job. At that point, starting from scratch and rethinking the entire thing is right thing to do. 
